[DOC] Tutorial: First Steps with SeqAn3 (#780)
seqan/seqan3: doc/tutorial/introduction/index.md

# First steps with SeqAn3 {#tutorial_first_example}

***Learning Objective:***

This tutorial walks you through small SeqAn3 programs. It is intended to give you a short overview
of what to expect in the other tutorials and how to use this documentation.

\tutorial_head{Easy, 30 min, \ref setup, [Ranges](https://github.com/seqan/seqan3/wiki/Ranges)\,
                                         [Concepts](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/constraints)}

*Every page in the tutorials begins with this section. It is recommended that you do the "prerequisite tutorials"
before the current one. You should also have a look at the links provided in "recommended reading" and maybe keep
them open in separate tabs/windows as reference.*

***These tutorials try to briefly introduce C++ features not well known, however they do not teach programming in C++!
If you know how to program in another language, but are not familiar with C++ and/or the significant
changes in the language in recent years, we recommend the following resources:***

  * Bjarne Stroustrup: "A Tour of C++", Second Edition, 2018.

[TOC]

> <br/>

Reviewer: Since we build html and not xhtml, we can use `<br>` everywhere

---

# Hello World!

Most good tutorials start with an easy *Hello World!* program. So have a look:

\snippet introduction_hello_world.cpp hello

Now you may ask, why we do not use std::cout or std::cerr for console output.

> Actually, for the given text it does not make a difference, as seqan3::debug_stream prints to std::cerr as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Actually, for the given text it does not make a difference since seqan3::debug_stream prints to std::cerr as well.
```

However, the debug stream provides convenient output for SeqAn's types as well as widely used data structures
(e.g. std::vector), which is especially helpful when you debug or develop your program
(that's where the name originates).

\assignment{Exercise: Debug stream}
Write a program that creates a std::vector of type `int` and initialise the vector with a few values.
Then print the vector with seqan3::debug_stream. Does your program also work with std::cerr?
\endassignment
\solution
\snippet introduction_debug_stream.cpp debug
\endsolution

\note
You may have spotted that the blue coloured keywords link you directly to the respective API documentation.

> This is helpful, if you need further information on a function, concept or class. We recommend you to open them

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is helpful if you need further information on a function, concept or class. We recommend you to open them
```

in separate browser tabs such that you can easily switch back to the tutorial.

<br/>

---

# Read sequence files

SeqAn3 provides fast and easy access to biological file formats.

> The following code example demonstrates the interface of seqan3::sequence_file_input.

Reviewer: Maybe put the first snippet here?

Can you imagine anything easier? After you have initialised the instance with a filename,
you can simply query the data of interest using the get function. The available fields are

> `SEQ`, `ID` and `QUAL` to retrieve sequences, ids and qualities, respectively. The latter is empty,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`SEQ`, `ID` and `QUAL` to retrieve sequences, ids and qualities, respectively. The latter is empty
```

unless you read FastQ files. The appropriate file format is detected by SeqAn from your file name suffix.

\snippet introduction_align.cpp sequence_input_include
\snippet introduction_align.cpp sequence_input

Here is the content of `seq.fasta`, so you can try it out!

~~~
>seq1
ACGTGATG
>seq2
AGTGATACT
~~~

<br/>

---

# Align two sequences

We have two sequences from the file above now – so let us align them.

> The pairwise sequence alignment is one of the core algorithms in SeqAn, and used by several library components

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The pairwise sequence alignment is one of the core algorithms in SeqAn and used by several library components
```

> and apps. It is strongly optimised for speed and parallel execution, while providing exact results and a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and apps. It is strongly optimised for speed and parallel execution while providing exact results and a
```

generic interface.

\snippet introduction_align.cpp alignment_include
\snippet introduction_align.cpp alignment

The algorithm returns a range of result objects – which is the reason for the loop here (in this case the range
has length 1). Instead of passing a single pair of sequences, we could give a vector of sequence pairs to the

> algorithm, which executes all alignments in parallel and stores the results in various seqan3::align_result

Reviewer: ```suggestion
algorithm which then executes all alignments in parallel and stores the results in various seqan3::align_result
```

> objects. The second argument to seqan3::align_pairwise is the *configuration*, which allows you to specify

Reviewer: ```suggestion
objects. The second argument to seqan3::align_pairwise is the *configuration* which allows you to specify
```

a lot of parameters for the alignment computation, for instance score functions, banded alignment and whether
you wish to compute a traceback or not. The configurations have their own namespace seqan3::align_cfg and can

> be piped for building combinations. Check the alignment tutorial, if you want to learn more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be piped for building combinations. Check the alignment tutorial if you want to learn more.
```

\note

> Every directory in the SeqAn sources contains an `all.hpp` file, which includes all the functionality

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every directory in the SeqAn sources contains an `all.hpp` file which includes all the functionality
```

of the respective (sub-) module. Thus, if you are working with several alignment methods, you can simply
include `seqan3/alignment/all.hpp` instead of naming each file individually.

<br/>

---

# Indexed searching
At the end of this introduction tutorial, we want to present you another efficient algorithm in SeqAn:
The following code example shows you the steps for performing rapid searches in an indexed genome sequence.

> As index we use the FM index here. After creation we want to query the positions of the motiv *TAG* inside

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As index we use the FM index here. After creation, we want to query the positions of the motif *TAG* inside
```

a given sequence.

\snippet introduction_align.cpp index_search_include
\snippet introduction_align.cpp index_search

> For more functions on that we refer you to the *Index Tutorial*. We hope, you have got a rough overview on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information on indexing and searching we refer you to the *Index Tutorial*. We hope you got a rough overview on
```

Reviewer: I'll also make a todo in my PR to change this to link to the tutorial

Author: Cool! 👍

However, the debug stream provides convenient output for SeqAn's types as well as widely used data structures
(e.g. std::vector), which is especially helpful when you debug or develop your program
(that's where the name originates).

\assignment{Exercise: Debug stream}
Write a program that creates a std::vector of type `int` and initialise the vector with a few values.
Then print the vector with seqan3::debug_stream. Does your program also work with std::cerr?
\endassignment
\solution
\snippet introduction_debug_stream.cpp debug
\endsolution

\note
You may have spotted that the blue coloured keywords link you directly to the respective API documentation.
This is helpful if you need further information on a function, concept or class. We recommend you to open them
in separate browser tabs such that you can easily switch back to the tutorial.

<br>

---

# Read sequence files

SeqAn3 provides fast and easy access to biological file formats.
The following code example demonstrates the interface of seqan3::sequence_file_input.

\snippet introduction_align.cpp sequence_input_include
\snippet introduction_align.cpp sequence_input

> 

Reviewer 2: seqan3::record s can also be printed as-is with the debug_stream, btw. We could even make more pretty ^^

> 

Reviewer 3: I agree. I would chose the structured bindings example because it is rather `pythonic` and might appeal to users.

you wish to compute a traceback or not. The configurations have their own namespace seqan3::align_cfg and can
be piped for building combinations. Check the alignment tutorial if you want to learn more.

\note
Every directory in the SeqAn sources contains an `all.hpp` file which includes all the functionality
of the respective (sub-) module. Thus, if you are working with several alignment methods, you can simply
include `seqan3/alignment/all.hpp` instead of naming each file individually.

<br>

---

# Indexed searching
At the end of this introduction tutorial, we want to present you another efficient algorithm in SeqAn:
The following code example shows you the steps for performing rapid searches in an indexed genome sequence.
As index we use the FM index here. After creation we want to query the positions of the motif *TAG* inside
a given sequence.

\snippet introduction_align.cpp index_search_include
\snippet introduction_align.cpp index_search

For more information on indexing and searching we refer you to the *Index Tutorial*. We hope you got a rough
overview on how the SeqAn3 interface has developed since version 2 and you are now free to continue with the

> tutorials of your interest.

Reviewer 2: I think this Tutorial is written well, but I would have preferred something more "aus-einem-Guss", e.g. it is not clear why we do indexing after alignment. Usually it is the other way around. Also the arg-parser is not used... One program as a whole, with annotated steps would be easier, or not?

Also some crucial "meta" things are missing. I think the "first steps" should explain a little bit more about SeqAn, e.g.
  - that SeqAn3 is comprised of Modules, what these modules are and how they relate to includes. The current text is very short....
  - it should teach a little about doxygen, e.g. "If you remember the name of a function or class, but don't know which (sub-)module it belongs to, you can enter it in the search bar (top-right)."...
  - it should teach about the SeqAn style, e.g.
    - "SeqAn3 uses `snake_case` for almost everything, also classes. Only C++ concepts are named using `CamelCase`."
    - "We use a lot of Modern C++ in SeqAn3 so some things might look alien at first, e.g. type templates are used like ordinary types in many situations (no `<>`). We also always use `{}` to initialise objects and not `()` which is only used for function calls. In general the style should be much easier for newcomers."
